In this video we'll learn how to copy and move constructor's an overloaded assignment work with inheritance
as we've seen.
Copy and move constructor's and the copy and move assignment operators are not automatically inherited
from the base class.
First let's remember that you may not have to provide these operations at all depending on your class
and its composition.
The compiler provided versions may be all you need.
However we can explicitly invoke these special constructors and the overloaded assignment operators
in our base class from the derived class if necessary.
First let's look at the copy constructor.
If we need to copy a Derived object then we must ensure that the base part of that derived object is
also copied.
If that base class has a copy constructor then we can explicitly invoke it in our derived copy constructors
initialization list.
This is very similar to what we did with our non-special constructors in the previous video.
The only part that might be confusing is that the base class constructor expects a reference to a base
object but we have a Derived object in the derived class.
In this case the derived object is referenced by the variable other so we can invoke the base class
and pass in other.
How does that work.
Well remember we have is a inheritance.
So a derived is a base and since a derived is a base we can pass in a drive to a method that expects
a base.
In this case the compiler uses slicing and slices out the base part of the derived object.
Slicing can sometimes cause issues but in this case it's fine.
Since what we want to do is copy the base part of the derived object.
Let's see the entire process in context.
In this example we have a base class and it has an integer attribute named value.
Let's just focus on the copy constructor.
We construct a new object based on the other object and we simply copy other value to this top value
and display a message to the console.
You may be wondering why we need a copy constructor at all in this example.
And you'd be absolutely correct.
We don't.
The compiler provided copy constructor would be perfectly appropriate here.
However for instructional purposes I'm writing the copy constructor so that we can see exactly what's
being called.
Ok so now let's see the derived class here's the derived class.
Notice that it's derived publicly from base and it adds an integer attribute named doubled value the
derived class has its own copy constructor that expects a ref to a derived object that will be copied.
In this case were explicitly copying the base part of other by invoking the base class copy constructor
in the derived copy constructor initialization list.
Again notice that we passed the other object which will be sliced to yield its base part once we copy
the base part.
We can take care of copying double value and then display a message to the console.
The move constructor works the same way now let's you know overloaded copy assignment works.
Here's our base class again and it has an overloaded copy assignment operator in this method we check
for self assignment and then we assign the right hand sides values to this object and we return this
object.
This is exactly what we've learned already and done previously.
Now let's see the derived class.
Here's our derived class which is publicly derived from base as before it adds a double value attribute.
It also has an overloaded copy assignment operator.
In this method it's important that we assign the base part of the derived object and then take care
of the doubled value.
So after we check for self assignment we call our base classes overloaded assignment operator and pass
in the right hand side object that we want to assign.
This will take care of assigning the base part.
Then we simply set double value to the right hand sides double value to complete the assignment of the
derived part.
Finally we just return that this object.
Note that if we don't explicitly call the base classes overloaded assignment operator then the base
part will not be assigned again to move assignment works in a similar manner.
OK so let's recap.
Often you don't need to provide your own copy move constructors or overloaded assignment operators.
If you do not define them in the derived class then the compiler will create them automatically and
call the base class versions for you if you do provide them in the derived class.
Then you must invoke the base versions explicitly yourself.
Finally be careful when you use raw pointers and dynamically allocated memory especially if both the
base and the derived classes have raw pointers.
If so you'll likely want deep copy semantics for both the base and derived classes.
So let's head over to the idea and we'll step through this example.
Ok so I'm backing the idea.
I'm in the section 15 workspace in the copy constructor assignment operator project.
Now this project is very similar to what we've seen before I'll scroll up here and you can see we have
a base class that has an integer attribute called value and then we've got no args constructor and overloaded
integer constructor.
A copy constructor here and an overloaded copy assignment operator and these are exactly what we've
seen before and we also have a destructor of course down here at the bottom.
What we're doing here is when we get no Oren's will set value to 0 when we get an integer we'll set
value to whatever integer we get.
In this case here's my copy constructor.
Again this the compiler provided one would have been great.
But I want to make sure that you see how these things are called.
So in this case I'm just copying the others value to this value and the same thing with the overloaded
copy assignment operator.
I'm checking that we don't have self assignment and I'm just assigning the right hand sides value to
this value.
OK great.
Let me close down this derive So we'll get to the derived in a little bit.
So if we run this we've got Here's a real simple main.
I've got a breakpoint right aligned 65.
The first thing we want to do is we want to create a B object and we're providing an integer as an initializer.
What we expect there is that the overloaded integer constructor fires and that's exactly what happened.
Then we've got a copy constructor because we're creating a B one based on B and then finally an assignment
operator.
And this is copy assignment.
Here this is an l value.
OK so let's walk through this and this should be pretty much review from what we've done before.
I just want to make sure that you understand the base part before we do the derived part.
All right so I'm right here on line 65.
I'm just about to create that object right here B.
So let's step through this.
And we expect the base overloaded integer constructor to be called.
And that's exactly where we are right here on line 16.
Will set the value to 100 which is what X is right here and it will display its base constructor and
that's it.
We've just constructed this object B.
Let's take a look at it real quick.
You can see its value is 100 and that's a base class object.
Now we're going to construct B one which is also a base class object based on be so we're going to call
it a copy constructor and you can see the cut because struct are right here on line 19.
So let's do that and a double clicked.
But you'll see what I mean here we are in base and we set this value to the others value and we just
assume we're going to display's base copy constructor here in a second.
So let me execute that and that's it.
Now you can see that B and B one are indeed copies of one another and we use the base copy constructor
to do that.
Finally we're going to say B equals be one.
In this case B already exists.
So this is not a constructor.
This is copy assignment.
So we expect this method right here on line 24 to be called because that's my copy assignment operator.
So I step through this.
There it's called just say base operator equals being called.
It's not self assignment and I'm simply assigning the right hand value to this value and returning the
object and I'm done.
OK so you can see exactly what's happened.
Exactly what we expected.
Right now we're going to unwind because these objects are going out of scope so we expect B one to be
destroyed first and then be to be destroyed second so the first Can the first destructor is the one
for BE1 and will execute that.
You can see the output right here and then the destructor for the B object executes.
And our program is done.
OK so now let me comment these lines out.
And what we'll do is we'll uncomment these lines and will go through this code in a sec.
I'm willing to move that breakpoint down to line 69 and let's take a look at our derived class right
here.
I'll expand it.
So here we have a derived class that is derived publicly from base.
It adds its own attribute doubled value remember it gets value from base but we've added double value.
And here I've got a no args constructor and it invokes the base classes.
No args constructor because we want to make sure that the mean this won't happen automatically.
But I'm just doing it explicitly here.
Then we've got the overloaded constructor for the drive and what we do here is we call the overloaded
base constructor for an int to write here and when that's done then we take care of initializing our
own stuff which in this case is double value value which we simply initialize it to two times X and
then we've got our copy constructor right here.
It expects a derived and what we do here is we call our base classes copy constructor and we pass.
Other other is a derived member base expects a base but since a derived is a base we can certainly pass
other in here and when we go through the debugger in this case I'll show you the slicing and how it
works.
Then we initialize our part and we're done.
And then finally we've got the assignment operator copy assignment operator where we check for sulpha
assignment and this line is really important here.
What I'm doing here is we're calling our base classes overloaded assignment operator and we're passing
in the right hand side.
Again that method in our base class expects a base object here read a ref to a base object.
What we're doing here is we're passing in a derived so the same idea we're going to get slicing there.
Then once the base is assigned I take care of assigning the part of the derived that really this method
is only concerned about and we return this and we're done.
OK so let's take a look at the main real quick.
Here we are.
It's very similar to the example with the base here recreating D which is a derived class object and
we're using in the initializer of the integer initializer sort of call the overloaded constructor.
Then we're copy constructing D1 from D and then finally we're going to do copy assignment from D-1 to
D.
Ok so I think that's.
I think you get the picture of what's going on.
It will definitely make sense now when we step through it.
So let's start the debugger and step through this example.
So we're right here on line 69.
We're just about to construct that D object.
We expect this constructor right here on line 43 to execute the overloaded constructor that expects
an integer.
So I step in and that's exactly where I'm at now.
I need to construct the base part of me so I'm going to invoke my base classes overloaded constructor
and pass in X to it.
So you can see that that's what's happening now.
I'm now in my base class constructor which is going to take care of initializing that base part of me
so will do that will display.
Base constructor.
And you can see now that I'm on line 45 so I'm back in my derived constructor just initialize the base
initialized double Vau and now it's is going to do a simple display statement and we're good.
So we've just created that db object and you can see the object looks like 100 from my base value and
200 for my doubled value.
OK so now let's look at the copy constructor.
That's what's being called here.
Remember we're constructing the scroll up just a little bit here.
We're constructing D-1 based on D.
So we expect to be called Huizar copy constructor right here on line 47.
So let's do that.
So I think I double clicked with what really happened was that our derived copy constructor got called
and that it immediately called our base copy constructor and we passed an other.
Now remember other was or is it derives object here.
But now I'm up here in my base class copy constructor.
But look at other you can see what I passed in.
Now it's 100 right but other originally had that doubled value as well so that got sliced out and the
only piece we're interested in is the base part of that object.
So that's what's happening here.
So we'll continue executing this.
Now we just copy constructed our base and when we come back right here on line 48 or 49 we've set double
value and now our derived copy constructor is done.
So you can see that the derived copy constructor will you'll see that on the output right here.
You see that the derived copy constructor invoked the base copy constructor and it passed in that derived
object to it which got sliced.
OK so last thing left to do is the assignment operator copy assignment.
So now we're going to say D equals D1 or signed d one to D.
Right.
So we're here we expect line 52 to it to execute right here that's our copy assignment for derived.
So I'll click this I'll try to click it once.
Good.
So now that's we're in line 53 now we're simply going to display derived operator equals.
We're going to check for self assignment.
And now what I want to do is I want to I want to copy the right hand side to the left hand side but
only the base part.
So in this case I want to call my base classes overloaded operator in pass in right hand side.
So now take a look at right hand side right hand side is a derived right.
So it's kind of base and it's got it's derived double value here.
But watch what happens when I call that method right here UCLA transfer control to it.
And this is where I'm at right here on line 25.
Look at that object.
Now look at right hand side.
Notice that now it's a base now.
So it just got sliced right.
That double part is not part of a base.
So it's it's sliced out.
So now we just keep executing.
We're going to execute the base operator equal which assigns the right hand sides value to the left
hand side.
Vallière this in this case since it's a member function and we just assigned the base part.
We're now in line 57.
We're going to take care of the double the double value part of us and we're done.
That's it.
Pretty straightforward.
Now obviously these values are going to be the same because we just assign them and they both have a
base part and a derived part.
Now we are going to go out of scope so we need to unwind and destroy these objects.
So the destructors will be called in the reverse order of the constructors right.
So the first destructor that will be called is the one for D-1 here and will execute that and you can
see that to do right.
Destructor executes followed by the base destructor right up here and 9:32 There we go.
And then the same thing will happen with the next object.
And our program is done.
OK.
So this gives you some insight into the way that did the derived constructors and copy constructors
work.
You could see it really make sense.
The only thing that might be a little confusing at the beginning is that for example our derived copy
constructor and operator equal expect a derived and the base class versions expect a base.
Same here but that's where the slicing comes in.
We can certainly pass a derived into here because a derived is a base.
OK so that covers it.
If there are any questions please let me know.